[Azriel]

* Azriel: My name is Azriel. I discuss religion, humor, psychology, and sociology. Here are [[instructions]] on how to use the site, which was created with [Canopy JS](https://github.com/canopy-js/canopy-js)

Instructions: Click links to open on the page, alt- or option-click to redirect, or use arrow keys and return for easier navigation.


[ER]

ER lets you build habits in your parsing of events.


[Gender]

All your arguments for not all men being deserving of authority go from being tainas to being arguments _for_ visible patriarchy as soon as you accept respect is an emotional need of men.

There are plenty of things wrong that men can do to women, but more of them have to do with shirking from gender roles rather than being expectant of them.


[Gratitude]

Gratitude for your own good fortunes also helps with ayin tov because you can overlook the failings of those who lack those good fortunes.


[Habit Anki]

You can't just say "if X do Y", because "X" is just a linguistic construct that can be used l'mafrea to check if something counts, but l'chatchila is not enough to change your reaction to the sum of things that have that description, whereas if you build up a category from many ostensive examples, if you memorize that something is true of that set, it actually will come to mind in the given circumstance, provided it looks similar to the rest. Because what we really want is not just a "do this" but a complex trigger and a complex procedure upon trigger.


[Humor]

Trying to think of broccoli jokes, ie in a case where I was grossly negligent, trying to spin it into a positive.


[Irony]

Ironic awareness of imperfect reasons for holding belief combined with vehemence of the belief. – Irony doesn't mean not serious. Saying something that you think is ridiculous doesn't make you ironic, it makes you a clown.

Irony is a matter of being aware of the oddities of a thing - while entirely doing it.

Saying things in such a way that you make it clear you couldn't possibly mean them is quite common, but strange.

"Look at how strange shaking a lulov seems to gentiles" – that's not ironic awareness, that's self consciousness. You have allowed people who are unsympathetic to your beliefs to "get inside your head."

Irony is like "isn't it funny that I show my undying affection to my wife by buying the same pre-cut flowers as every other husband", but the answer is, yes, it is an expression of affection.

Irony is maturity about the downsides or possible criticisms of the course of action you nevertheless have decided 100% to take.


[Memory]

Why does a property bring to mind an entity in STM, but I can't label an entity "thing I want to remember", which is also a property?

Why does a memory palace work such that I can associate a more familiar thing to a less familiar thing in one try, whereas in other areas like habits doing so is very difficult?

Why is it possible to use a person as a cue, and then have them trigger a very specific fact about them, eg a person and the name of the street they live on? Perhaps if that is the only thing about them in STM that's what it triggers, so the person is a way to list threads, and with the person you can STM hit the aspect.

The way in which if I try to associate something in my mind with "brush teeth and floss", then that will get stored as "do [dental related things]", and then when I try to remember it, once I produce one such thing, I will think I've remembered everything, and so remembering multi-part ideas requires remembering clearly-incomplete images that beg questions.


[Mussar]

A mature person exaggerates the ways in which they were responsible and diminishes the ways in which others were. How does this differ from someone with stam low self-esteem / self-blame? The mature person focuses on their culpability in this instance, but doesn't think they are worse than other people in general.


[Psychology]

Be careful if your self-diagnosis is mechayev other people rather than yourself

Psychology and self-awareness is good to have, it is juts a shame that its proponents so far have often tended towards those looking to use it for self-excuse.

Understanding is the feeling of having an index to a corpus of knowledge or experience, ie with manageable forereferences or generic predication.


[Religion]

The joke that people who are machshiv secular learning are just post-facto rationalizing why they had to learn multivariable calculus.

Have you ever noticed that other people's tainas on Hashem sound stupid?

On religion, Azriel's point basically is, there are no outright proofs for Judaism, but there are no outright disproofs, and so there's no objective reason to prefer one or the other, and you'll say that means anything could be true, but that's not right, because Judaism is an account of what happened that is consistent and documented as early as anyone would have had ways of documenting. So if I tell you something outlandish that could theoretically be true, that's on a lower level that if true, makes perfect sense why things are that way. Eg if I tell you the world was created a moment ago, it could be, but why is everything this way? But Yiddishkeit if true is very consistent with the world, that a group of people would have kept record of what happened at great expense for thousands of years, there aren't an infinite number of such possibilities, there probably aren't even ten.

Another aspect of arguments for and against religion is gadlus: that Yiddishkeit produces people who are demonstrably great, whereas secularism doesn't, and what are the chances that the Torah is just something random that aligns with the metziyus like that. – and this also sends the person looking at gadlus in its own right. Same also with the wisdom of Torah, eg market economics etc, what are the chances this is by chance, etc.

Azriel is basically advocating detente in the religious secular argument.

Your reasons for thinking an human-centric world is unlikely are due to your acculturation.

If you had to pick between hakaras hatov without Hashem or Hashem without specifics, I would say the former is better, like someone who gives a kid a bicycle, do you prefer they love the bicycle and forget from time to time who gave it to them, or that they say thank you but don't actually know what you did for them.

In the absence of proofs, qualitative aspects of judaism are rayas. – having exhausted probabilities, we can only look to things like the unlikeliness of Yiddishkeit having gotten right what it does etc.

Holy places are objective - details rather than context being machrea.

Emuna peshuta being better than bekiyus in daas ma she'tashiv, to give readers permission not to be buki.


[Secular Learning]

Nobody does anything unless it relates to them in some way, and so saying secular learning must be for a parnassa means we allow it if you are making yourself something, eg a doctor, but we are not holding up the ideal of stam bekiyis.


[Self-Esteem]

Gedolim are not threatened by one another because they found an achievement that required davka their skills, and so they aren't jealous of anyone else's chalek.


[Society]

The problem with social media isn't that it is shtuss, there is such a thing as wittiness in a small statement, just like there is such a thing as ranking people by looks, the problem is that if you do it, it edges out sensitivity to other qualities.


[Inbox]

Is there any miala to having the art of the society be good even among people who don't appreciate it?

The entire purpose of Azriel is to teach people not to have opinions – the ideal of the soldier versus the aesthete.

People not knowing their views are one of many.

Countering the psychological effects of the secular world requires meta-cognition and most people aren't aware of it.

Azriel's conformity is due to aestheticism, eg walrus song, a waste of people's time.

How abstractions are actually composed of mechanistic specifics and how you must enumerate to impart them.

The lie of eg Mishpacha is that a Passaic is the same as a Lakewood, just more honest about communal failings, when really the desire to harp on communal failings is to highlight ways in which they are actually the superiors of more insular communities. People aren't reading the reporting in order to fix communal problems, they are reading it to quiet their consciences that more is expected of them in bein adam l'makom.

Are you moderate because that's what Hashem wants from you in this specific case, or just stam? Eg Bnei Levi, killing family members.

The feeling of candle lighting isn't proof, but if it were metaphysically signifcant, you would be able to feel it.

Yes the opinion of the religious is biased, but everyone is biased, the first wave of secularists were nogea to tavia, and the wave coming back are nogea to the recognition that secular life is not pleasant.

There are people wearing techeles because they learned the sugya that way but most people who do it have low self-esteem and are overcompensating in the opposite direction to look for some visible way to be correct about something "everyone else" is wrong about, and so when you see techeles it is usually a nebach-spectacle.

If someone would say "I acknowledge smartphones cause brain damage, but I need it for X", then I would be listening.

People act as if having a powerful community that can punish transgressors is a bad thing, but that people know acting badly will hurt them in shidduchim etc is a very good thing.

The top-level of this isn't a taxonomy, it is just a top-level set of terms, which map to categories overlappingly, so mussar and psychology aren't mutually exclusive trees all the way down, although they may have slightly different ranges.

The core of the discussion of conformity is the reality of causing mental events in others.

Reform Siddur - if you want to be a traditionalist have I got the siddur for you!

People with a logical disposition are not correct more frequently than anyone else.

Liberalism causes you to become less discerning because all day you're talking about the abstract boxes things fit in, that all these are equal, and you spend less time thinking about details. And stam a secular person is calling eg two things marriage, and so becomes less sensitive to the characteristics of the thing. – ie by having incorrect factual views, eg about gender differences, they become insensitive to noticing those specific differences, in addition to becoming less sensitive generally due to the abstraction involved in liberalism, and leftism and liberalism are both abstract, the latter just has more factual claims about which things are b'etzem the same, as opposed to merely things that should be treated the same ie liberalism.

Anger is based on the premise that something was wrong, it harmed me, and better was coming to me, so we have to be mafrich one of those things,

You need a disqualifying factor in humor even if the suggestion is generally ridiculous.

An edgy posek is an example of how modern is orthogonal to content views, you can have someone who is ruined by post-modern edginess but holds to the right side of hashkafic views.

Irritability is the mind collecting proof that one should go about a certain course of action, once on decides to do it, the irritability will decrease because it isn't needed anymore. So don't think of irritability as being caused by the irritants so much as it is caused by the existence of an unmade decision, and irritation is being stoked by the internal supporters of a certain course of action.

If you feel pride at having "mastered" the secular world while still being religious, you've probably compromised your religiosity more than you realize.

When you feel "I really need to give this person my feedback", consider that if it is so obvious to you, it is probably obvious to any reasonably discerning person, and so if they haven't received this feedback, it is because they don't have a rebbe, and if they don't even have a rebbe, they're not in the parsha of Orthodox Judaism, and certainly not the parsha of kabalas tochacha.

It is fine to be idealistic about your own potential, but idealism about other people's potential is often the same thing as irritability about another person's lack of initiative.

Reddit is why young people feel it is important to be funny even if they don't get up in the morning.

What happened between big chill group and newcomers who are self-exceptionalist?

You meet accomplished business men who feel like nothing because they're not funny, and you see people who are completely unaccomplished and barely do anything but focus their efforts on being funny.

There is a type of person where everything either is to their preferences, or bad.

SR Hirsh, Chasam Sofer, and the rov of Yerushalayim everyone held of.

Azriel will say things like "the 'can secular people be moral' question".

The desire to be a commentator vis a vis other people is a character flaw

People are right to say that Lakewood isn't the same as gedolim, but Passaic is also not just in different ways.

Either don't raise your kids discerning, or teach them to discern the good and the bad such that they see the bad is not so pashut, but don't leave them in the cravas in the middle where they start to see bad but don't further see context. - The problem is not too much analysis but too little analysis.

Espresso is a transfer of wealth from other people to you.

Everyone expressing concern for technology should be worried it is just self-aggrandizement, and should use a modest fearful tone.

Occam's razon types are usually also skeptical about eg gender differences, ie their outlook causes them to ignore intangibles that we know about.

The irony is that no matter what middos you are trying to impart with a chinuch, by definition once some chinuch has become standard, it makes people brittle to only deal with well-defined challenges, and someone from a more tumultuous background might have an edge because real difficulties are a better teacher of middos than teachers of middos are.

Sensitive people are as at risk as insensitive people are for mistakes.

First you have to be clear about ideals, or groups will just meander in instrumental mediocrity, but then you need to be realistic about the difference between the ideal and the possible.

Just to consider a new idea fairly you have to be biased towards it, because the biggest bias is inertia of thought.

Don't speak like you're an expert but for the right reasons.

Anti-feminism as a shita is a self-contradiction.

If you make edgy jokes, eventually you'll slip up.


